It's hard for me personally to watch
Catholics like beat up on migrants and
refugees. Everyone has [music] innate
human dignity.
>> I don't care who you are, get back in
your vehicle.
>> Like many Americans, I've been [music]
watching what's happening in Minneapolis
with growing alarm.
The questions this moment of crisis
[music] raises aren't just political,
but also moral and even spiritual.
[music] That's something I've been
thinking about since my conversation
with Father James Martin in early
January. Martin is one of the most vocal
and influential members of the [music]
Catholic Church's progressive wing.
Through his best-selling books, as the
editor at large of the Jesuit
publication America magazine, on social
media, and even late night TV,
>> Father Jim [music] Martin
Father, thank you so much for being
here. [cheering]
Much pleas.
>> Martin helps explain the Catholic Church
to Americans. [music] And this is
certainly a fraught time for American
Catholics. On the one hand, the church
has become increasingly outspoken
against President Trump's [music]
policies, particularly when it comes to
immigration.
>> If people are in the United States
illegally, [music]
there are ways to treat them. There are
courts. There's a system of justice. On
the other, many prominent administration
officials are [music] also Catholic.
Martin and I spoke before federal agents
killed Alex Prey in [music] Minneapolis.
But so much of what we talked about
feels even more relevant now. We began
though with something more personal.
[music] His new book, Work in Progress,
and how the early summer jobs he had
growing up prepared him for a life of
service. Here's my [music] conversation
with Father James Martin.
Father Martin, thank you so much for
coming. I really appreciate you taking
the time.
>> My pleasure.
>> Um, you know, I was reading something
that you recently wrote in America
magazine, and you said, "Despair takes
us away from God in the present. It
keeps us focused on all the terrible
things that may happen in the future,
and that means that we can be blind to
all the ways, even if they are small,
that God is communicating with us now."
And I found that quite a meaningful
idea. You make the case that instead of
focusing on what is lacking, we should
be noticing the ways in which God does
show up in small ways all the time. And
I was just wondering how does God
manifest itself in those small ways that
are so meaningful on a day-to-day basis
for you?
>> Well, I would say everywhere um you can
look for God. And one of the hallmarks
of Jesuit spirituality, I'm a Jesuit as
you know, is finding God in all things.
So God's um presence is not just
confined to within the walls of a church
or in reading the Bible, but it's in
nature and relationships and work and
food and entertainment. Uh and so the
key is just being attentive and aware,
right? Really noticing. Um to take an
example, if you're stressed out and
you're, you know, facing a difficult
medical diagnosis or a financial problem
and you pray for peace, you know, maybe
it won't come immediately, but you know,
a couple hours later, a friend calls
and, you know, tells you something that
helps you to calm down a little bit to
see God in that, to see God reaching out
that way. And so that's that's what I
mean about noticing. And sometimes it
takes some attention because we tend to
want those fixes immediately. Sometimes
God's a lot more quiet and subtle,
tricky.
>> So I'm going to confess I'm kidding. Um
but I
>> feel free if you want to. [laughter]
>> I have had varying um experiences with
Catholicism. Uh I grew up in a very
Catholic household and you'll be happy
to know that I was also expelled from
one Catholic institution.
>> Wow.
>> Um for a bad attitude. Um, the nuns
didn't like me very much. And you know,
you were not always called to the
church. Uh, you grew up in a what I
jokingly call a sort of negligent
Catholic. Is that fair to say?
[laughter]
>> I usually say lukewarm Catholic. My my
parents were Catholic. I was baptized
first holy communion, confirmation, all
that. We were we weren't super
religious. I mean, I prayed to God to
ask for things. Let me get an A. Let me
get a home run at little league. And
then if I didn't, I was mad at God. Um,
I used to think of it as a very
transactional thing too, which I think
is the way a lot of Catholics and
Christians think. If I do this, God will
do that. So, yeah, I would say lukewarm
Catholic.
>> And we're sitting here because you've
just written a book uh which is not
about the things that you normally write
about, which are prayer and, you know,
your experience as a Jesuit priest.
This is a book about work and more
specifically your summer jobs when you
were growing up.
>> Why did you want to write a book like
that? [laughter]
>> Uh, you know, initially I just wanted to
tell these stories because I would tell
these stories about these crazy summer
jobs that I had, bus boy, caddyy,
dishwasher back in the 70s and then 80s
and some of them were kind of nuts and I
would tell these to my friends and they
would think they were hysterical. So I
started writing them down and then I
realized I could move from the funny
summer jobs into my work at GE after I
graduated uh from college and then into
the Jesuits. So it became kind of a
vocation story and uh I just I also in
terms of finding God in all things, I
thought it was important to show how God
could lead someone who was a bus boy and
a caddy and a dishwasher to the
priesthood and that God can be found um
in all sorts of ways and in all sorts of
people.
>> Yeah. I mean, you come from a
working-class background,
>> uh, and many of your jobs when you were
young were sort of manual labor, um, in
some sense. What What did you learn from
that?
>> Uh, not to treat people who are on the
lower rungs of the economic ladder like
dirt. That's one of the first things I
learned. Because
>> you were treated badly often.
>> Yeah. In some places, I mean, you know,
I was this 15-year-old bus boy or paper
boy, and you're not treated well. So, I
learned the value of just treating
people with dignity. But I also learned
the value, as I say in the book, of
working hard, showing up, being on time,
listening to people, asking for when you
don't know how to do something,
apologizing, but not apologizing
reflexively. There are a lot of life
lessons uh in the book. And I'm amazed
that, you know, because when I was a bus
boy or a caddy or a dishwasher, I
thought, "This is terrible. I just want
nothing to do with this. I just want the
money." Um I was really intent on
getting rich. Uh but now I look back and
I say I learned a lot.
>> This is actually the perfect segue
because you end up going to Wharton um
business school and I have to say um the
way you describe then going into
corporate America, you end up working
for GE, right?
>> Um
>> you described as literally soul
destroying. I have never read such a
grim description [gasps and laughter] of
what it's like to work in corporate
America. I mean you went to therapy, you
got physically ill from it, you hated
what you were doing. Why? You know, I
want to say that the vast majority of
people I worked with at GU were great,
right? Immoral and kind, but there were
enough jerks uh to make it really
difficult. And, you know, the emphasis
was on the bottom line. And this was the
80s. It was the age of the Yepy. And
Jack Welsh was the CEO of GE and um
would fire people regularly, right? Um
if we used to say up or out, if you
weren't moving up, they would fire you.
And I couldn't see myself emulating some
of the people above me, you know, like
the CEOs and the the people in the
seauite as they say now. So, you know, I
thought I won out, but where am I going
to go? You know, I can't be like, what
am I going to play for the Phillies or
be an opera singer? I didn't know what
to do.
And one night, I came home and turned on
the TV and there was a documentary about
the Trappist monk, Thomas Merin. And it
just was so beautiful and so romantic
and so captivating that I went out and
bought his autobiography, The Sevenstory
Mountain, and I just devoured it. And I
thought, "This is what I want. And where
has this been all my life?" And it took
me a couple years to think about it. And
I was going to a psychologist cuz I was
so stressed. And one day he said the
question that I think every young person
should be asked, which is, "What would
you do if you could do anything you
wanted to do?" And I said, "Well, that's
easy. I joined the Jesuits and he said
why don't you and I thought yeah why
don't I [laughter]
so I went home I went back to my office
and called the Jesuits and said I'm
ready to enter and they were like who
are you
>> it brings me back to where we started
which is this idea of picking up on
things and noticing things it feels like
you had not noticed that about yourself
this thing that you saw when you looked
at the story of Thomas Merin at the
Trappist monk it sort of awoke something
in you but you had not really known that
It was there.
>> No, because I thought the idea that God
would be like communicating with me
seemed kind of arrogant, right, and
borderline delusional, right? That God
would call you. But the call, which I
think I thought was like a vision or a
voice was really this desire. And I I
think I had to be so miserable at GE for
God to break through. I think that
happens a lot. When we're vulnerable,
God's able to break through.
>> You're now this kind of I'm going to use
these words and I'm going to ask you
what you think. um spiritual emissary um
to the wider world. I wanted to also
talk to you about the church right now.
How do you see the state of the Catholic
Church in the United States?
>> That's a big question.
>> It's a big question. We're going to
start big and narrow down. But I'm just
wondering
>> in the United States.
>> In the United States, yeah,
>> I would say healthy except for the fact
that only 30% are going regularly. I
think in general healthy, right? When I
visit parishes and go to parishes,
people are happy with um their parish
and they love being Catholic and they
love the pope. They especially love now
that we have an American pope, they love
Pope Leo, but I think there's some
division, right? I think it reflects the
political divisions that are going on,
the church, you know, can feel very
divided when you go in certain places.
So among the ones who are still going to
church and still faithful and still
consider themselves Catholic, I think
they struggle with uh certain church
teachings and division uh in the
parishes and maybe you know I mean you
know Catholics who are more conservative
think that the church should be more
conservative. Catholics who are more
progressive think the church should be
more progressive but I think the biggest
crisis would be people who don't believe
in God anymore. That's and we do see
people falling away. It's it's
interesting because you started by
saying healthy and while yes there's
that increasing secularization
people have left the church not so many
people go to church regularly we are
seeing this growing desire especially
among young people for connection and
for faith uh the number of Gen Z
Catholics is actually increasing right
and that's according to a recent Harvard
study that I read for this um young
churchgoers seem to participate more
deeply in the church than perhaps their
older counterparts, which I found
counterintuitive somehow that that's
true. They go to confession more. They
participate in the sacraments. I mean,
you minister to young Catholics. What do
you think is going on in that sector of
the Catholic population?
>> Well, interestingly, I see different
surveys saying different things. I say I
see surveys saying that what you just
said and I see surveys saying, "Oh, no,
that's all overblown." But anecdotally,
I experienced that. Anecdotally, I
experienced um you know, people in their
like 20s and even younger um going back
to church. Um someone described it to me
as post secular, which I like that the
secular world is just like lacking for
them. They want a sense of meaning. They
want a sense of mystery. They want
community is a big word, right? They
want to belong.
>> But I also think it's just I think
people have a natural desire for God in
their lives. I really do. And I think
for a lot of younger people, they're
finding the secular world just doesn't
do it. It's been a surprise actually.
This is like the last 10 years. Uh and
it's exciting, you know, for people in
the Catholic Church. I think the
challenge is to um invite these people
who might be um looking primarily for an
identity, right, with a group into a
deeper relationship with Jesus and with
God. That's that's the key, right? So,
while you might be interested in a
particular church because of um you
know, the community itself, right? which
is where we find God, right? There also
needs to be a connection with Jesus and
God. So, it can't just be me in my
community, right? Are you helping the
poor, right? Are you living out what
Jesus says,
>> right? Or is it just about kind of going
to mass and kind of ticking the boxes?
>> So, people go to church to get
something, which is fine, right? To get
spiritual nourishment, to get
reflections on the gospels, to receive
the sacrament, right, of the Eucharist.
Um, but it also does need to be giving.
Are you doing kind of the hard work of
Christianity?
>> Kind of what we've been talking about is
that the Catholic Church is having a
moment in the United States.
>> I'll say,
>> and first of all, I'm just wondering
what you think having an American pope
will do for the American Catholic
Church.
>> A lot. Uh, first of all, it brings uh
the Pope and the Vatican uh closer to
people, right? And therefore, it brings
God closer to people. He's not Jesus.
He's not God. And the Vatican is not
perfect, but it brings religion closer
to people. To have him speak in English
is shocking. And when he comes, whenever
it is he comes, it's going to be a huge
>> when he's coming.
>> Uh, no. I've heard some rumors, but
they're only rumors. But his first visit
to the US is going to be nuts. I mean, I
I grew up outside of Philadelphia. I was
just at Villanova a few uh months ago.
That's all anybody wanted to ask me.
When is the Pope coming to Villanova?
And of course, everyone in Chicago wants
him to come back.
>> So,
>> there are a lot of questions about how
he's going to manage this church. Um,
>> you know, he said recently in an
interview, and I'm speaking specifically
of the United States. Sure. Um, that he
doesn't plan to get involved in partisan
politics. Um,
do you think he'll be able to keep to
that?
Well, look, uh, his mission is to preach
the gospel. And if the gospel has
political implications, so be it, right?
So, uh, when he sees migrants and
refugees being abused, right, or not
treated well, that's part of Jesus
asking us to welcome the stranger. So,
he's going to say something about that,
right? I think what happens is people
sometimes impute political motivations
to what the pope or a pope says um that
are really just the gospel, like take
care of the poor, right? you know, if
that has political implications, well,
that's tough, right? That's that's what
we're supposed to be talking about. He's
pretty smart, right? He is not going to
sort of wade into things um in a in a
sort of foolish way.
>> He's a smart guy. I think one of the
>> He also also understands the American
context very well,
>> right? I think one of the interesting
things is unlike what people some people
said about Pope Francis, you cannot say
about Pope Leo, he doesn't understand
the United States. That excuse is now
out the window.
under um Pope Francis, there was a lot
of vocal opposition um to his papacy
here in the United States among a
certain section of uh the clergy.
Do you see that continuing to be a
problem? Is that a problem that Pope Leo
is trying to diffuse?
>> I think he's definitely trying to
diffuse it and I think he knows it very
well. Um it was really sad. There was a
lot of vocal opposition to Francis. I
would say it was a minority, but they
were very vocal, very wellunded, very
uh, you know, sort of persistent. And I
I was amazed because some of the same
people who said you could never disagree
with the pope under John Paul and
Benedict were like disagreeing with
Francis constantly and calling him an
anti- pope and he's a heretic and he's
an apostate and all these things. It was
amazing to me. It was really amazing to
me to to see. And I think there's a lot
of desire among uh US Catholics for
unity because I don't think anybody
likes it. I don't think people on the
right like it or people on the left like
it. So I think that they're looking to
him to unify the church. And you know
what? I think he can do it, but it's
going to be hard.
>> Can I can I ask you what how that plays
out practically speaking? Because um
immigration is a key issue. It's also a
real fundamental part of the way that
the church sees its mission. I mean, I
have been in many many Catholic
institutions on the US border in Mexico
that deal with migrants all up all
through Latin America and and here in
the United States. Um, and of course,
this is it's a signature issue of the
Trump administration as well. uh you
know in the fall the US Conference of
Bishops they issued this rare collective
statement objecting to the harsh
treatment of immigrants.
Words are one thing, action is another.
What actions do you think the church
should be taking?
>> Well, as you pointed out, the church is
already taking actions by working with
migrants and refugees all over the
place. Um some of my Jesuit brothers
work with uh migrants on the border,
right? they're already doing it, right?
And so really it's standing up with
people that we've always stood with,
right? And it's it's advocating for
people that we've always been next to.
>> Um so the the US bishops have been great
on this. Um and it's one of the reasons
is because the US bishops and the
Catholic Church knows that community so
well. And look, it goes back to the
gospel. Jesus said in Matthew 25, you
know, when you welcome the stranger, you
welcome me. It's pretty it's pretty
clear, but people sometimes ignore it or
they explain it away. They say, "Well,
we only have to take care of uh migrants
who are doing the following things,
right? Or all the migrants are here
illegally when we know most of the
migrants are here legally." So, they
explain it away. I mean, I don't want to
focus on just that because I mean,
there's all sorts of other Catholics
that don't listen to other things too,
right? Like economic things, right? Or,
you know, paying people a just wage,
right? Or caring for the environment,
you know, as Pope Francis asked us to
do. A lot of people just exempt
themselves out of that.
>> The old expression is cafeteria
Catholic, right? Right. You you pick
some and take and leave the others. I
think in the United States, we are all
to a certain extent cafeteria Catholics,
right? There's some things that we don't
like about the church and the church
teaching, but the fundamentals really
need to be accepted. And one of the
fundamentals is caring for the poor. You
can't get away from that. And caring for
the stranger. And it's it's hard. It's
it's I have to say it's hard for me
personally to watch Catholics like beat
up on migrants and refugees. It's so
clear in the gospels. And if it's not
clear enough in the gospels, it should
be clear enough from Catholic social
teaching. And if it's not clear enough
from Catholic social teaching, it should
be clear from what the popes have said.
So it's it's really kind of we sometimes
say invincible ignorance. You just it
can't be surmounted. Well, as we're
speaking, we've seen pretty harsh
tactics uh over the past few months and
beyond employed by the Trump
administration um across the country in
US cities. On a personal level, I'm just
I can hear your distress, but I'm just
wondering what your thoughts are on that
>> that no matter who a person is, no one
should be treated like this. I mean,
even if you're a prisoner on death row,
right, you shouldn't be treated like
this. Everyone has innate human dignity.
And so what horrifies me is the
treatment, the cruelty, the meanness.
And it's shocking to me. I sometimes
think, how can people like sleep at
night treating people like dirt and
beating them up and calling them names?
By the way, Jesus says in the gospel, if
you call someone a name, you're going to
hell. There's something that we don't
think about a lot, right? And that
happens all the time. So it's it's
horrifying to me. But again, I I don't
understand how people sleep at night. I
don't understand how they can sort of
sort of uh reconcile that with the
gospels. It's amazing to me.
>> How should church leaders then deal with
this pushpull though? Because you're
talking about trying to bring unity
>> and yet of course there is division in
society. There is division among the
church leaders. There is division among
>> sure
>> the [clears throat] people who are
actually in the pews.
I mean,
how are they supposed to navigate what
is a very divisive time?
>> Well, I think it's pretty clear. One,
it's never demonizing the other person,
right? Always giving the other person
the benefit of the doubt. Um, it's
continuing to preach the gospel in
season and out, right? So, I think it's
possible and I think a lot of bishops
are doing a very good job with
immigration. And I also think standing
with them is important. physically going
to these places and be well and being
with them, right? I'll tell you a story.
Um there's a Jesuit who's a big um hero
of mine, Greg Bole. Um, Greg Bole works
in LA with a former gang members and I
was interviewing him in front of a group
of uh, young people and there were
questions from the audience and this one
guy said to Greg, um, I work in the
inner city and so many of my people that
I work with are despairing. What should
I do? Right? And I was thinking in my
mind now, what would I tell this guy? I
would say do this, do that, do this. You
know what Greg said? He said, are you
standing with them? And the guy said, of
course. He goes, "Then that's all you
should do." So, I think that's what the
church needs to do is to stand with
these people, everybody who's on the
margins.
>> Does that mean priests standing at
protests?
>> I think it means everything. It means
being with those people emotionally,
spiritually, sometimes physically means
advocating for them. It means
explaining them. Sure. Standing with
people. I think that's a really helpful
way of looking at what the church should
be doing. On their side. We are on their
side.
>> Father Martin, I do wonder how your own
views have sort of evolved on this
because during the first Trump
administration, you were very vocal on
social media about things that you
disagreed with. Um, have your views
shifted on when and how to speak out on
something?
>> Yeah, I try to focus on the gospel and I
try not to critique someone by name and
I try not to get too political. I mean,
we all learn on social media what's good
and what's bad and what lands with
people and what doesn't. And I think I'm
on more solid ground by just quoting
Jesus. I sometimes subweet something and
I just write, "I was a stranger and you
did not welcome me." Matthew 25. Look,
that that in itself should be more
persuasive than anything Jim Martin
says.
Speaking of um marginalized communities,
you are extremely well known for your
LGBTQ advocacy. Um and that is I don't
have to tell you one of the most
divisive issues in the church.
>> Correct.
>> Can you tell me how you became involved
in this and and why?
>> Sure. Um I knew LGBTQ people. Obviously,
I live in New York. I have LGBTQ
friends. I'd written a little bit about
it um in like the early 2000s for
America Media where I work. I ministered
to them, right? Um but it wasn't until
2016, the Pulse nightclub massacre in
Orlando, Florida, where 49 people were
killed. Um and I saw the response of the
bishops um to be what I considered
really poultry. It was the largest mass
shooting in US history up to the time
and really very few bishops said
anything. And I really remember
thinking, what does this community have
to do to get the church to notice it?
Does it have to be murdered? Is that
what it is? So, I did a Facebook video
that went viral and that led to a talk
and that led to a book and it kind of
blew up and went crazy.
It's been a shock to me. Um when I was
at the cinnid um for the last two years,
2023 and 2024,
I walked into the big hall and it seemed
like everybody knew me, which was really
weird.
>> It was a weird
>> experience. Good way or bad way that
everyone knew you.
>> Sometimes good, sometimes bad.
So there were three reactions. One was
since we were in Italy, Father James,
bravo, a guri, gracier, you know, and
you're a prophet.
Uh, the second reaction was, will you
help me in my dasis? I don't know what
to do. And the third reaction was
shaking their literally shaking their
finger at me. Um, and and saying all
sorts of, you know, critical things.
Most of the people, the vast majority of
the people were very open and very
positive and welcoming, but it's a
really divisive issue, particularly in,
as I found out, subsaharan Africa and
Eastern Europe.
>> Unbelievable the stuff that people said.
And so it just um you know, makes me
want to work harder and want to reach
out to more people.
>> What position would you like to see the
church take today on on those issues?
listening
basically at the Senate a number of
people and I I I made it a point to talk
to people who disagreed with me and
disagreed with other people who were
ministering with LGBTQ people because I
wasn't the only one and the the main
sort of response was is a western
ideology that you are sort of imposing
on our country. Now, it's hard to rebut
that because you don't want to come off
as colonialist
or it's unnatural, just doesn't exist.
I had a
archbishop, I won't say from where, say
to me, the reason that there are gay
people in my country is because people
like you pay them to be gay. And I said
to him, you know, I want to be polite. I
said to March Bishop, you know, I don't
know about that. I don't know about
people being paid to be gay. I said,
'But you certainly have to admit that
some people are born that way. No,
they're not. It's unnatural. So that's
where we are in some parts of the
church. And so listening and just
getting to know them is the first step.
And it's happening though because more
and more people are coming out. And
interestingly, more and more nieces and
nephews of bishops and priests and
sisters are coming out. So it's often
times people in their families that help
them to change. I think I'm wondering if
you think the church can ever really be
a welcoming place though to LGBTQ people
when it church dogma and a and a large
part of the church still sees their
sexuality as ungodly in some way.
>> The answer is yes because there are
plenty of parishes that are very
welcoming where LGBTQ people feel
extremely welcomed. You know, for a lot
of LGBTQ Catholics, what they've said
is, "Okay, I don't agree with this
particular part of church teaching, but
I'm Catholic and this is my church and I
want to be here." And that's that's how
they've kind of reconciled that. So, the
answer is yes. The invitation for the
rest of the church is to say, you know,
can we extend the same welcome that we
do to everybody else? Right? We're all
in a sense imperfect and in all in a
sense sinful and all in a sense
unworthy, right? But we welcome people.
There's it's a very selective
uh sort of focus on LGBTQ people
unfortunately in the church because you
don't say to somebody, you know, anyone
who uses birth control, right? Anyone
who's divorced or remarried, anyone who,
excuse me, is masturbating, right? These
are all, right, sinful things. We don't
focus on that. How about anyone who
doesn't, you know, care for the
environment or pay a just wage or care
for the poor or forgive or is kind,
right? Right. We don't focus on them.
They're welcome. So why not LGBTQ
people?
>> You know, you are part of a wing of the
Catholic Church that is more liberal, I
would say. Is that a fair estimation?
More of your of your where you stand in
the spectrum.
>> I'd say progressive. I think that's
fair.
>> Okay.
>> But I'm I'm more traditional than you
might think. That's what I would
>> You say that, too? Yeah. I mean, I think
every priest is more traditional than
you might think.
>> Well, I mean, I believe in every word in
the creed, right? I'm very devoted to
Mary. I love the saints. You know, I go
to mass every day. Hey, I go to
confession a couple times a month. So,
yeah, I'm pretty traditional, but on
some things, I think people see me as
more progressive. I think that's fair.
>> In that, just with that said, I do want
to get your view on a shift that people
perceive as happening in the Catholic
Church, which is
that the energy seems to be on the
conservative side of the spectrum in the
Catholic Church at the moment here in
the United States. That's where we see a
lot of the sort of
devotion, people coming in wanting to
embrace the church. That's the side of
it that they find appealing.
That seems different than the side that
I hear you emphasize.
>> Well, again, I'm more traditional than
people might think. Right.
>> You've been criticized for
>> what some see as pushing a liberal
agenda inside the church. I mean, would
you accept that as a criticism? I would
accept that people do criticize me for
that, but no, I'm not pushing an agenda
really. And and I really try to stay
away from that. I just try to preach the
gospel. And people interpret it as
pushing some sort of liberal agenda.
Yeah. I am actually not very political,
for example. Like I don't really know
much about politics. I don't sort of
follow that too much. Um it's just where
I see people who are struggling. Um, but
you're right. There is a lot of energy
around the more traditional side of the
church these days in the United States
and we have to be attentive to that and
meet people where they are.
>> I don't know. I hope that answers your
question.
>> It does. It does. I mean, you know,
>> I guess what I'm struggling with I
sometimes struggle with we I'm not
saying you're doing this, but we
sometimes um sort of overlay political
categories to the church. Liberal,
conservative,
um, progressive, traditional. I guess
the reason that I'm asking about this is
that more broadly there is a renewed
debate about the place of religion in
American political and civic life.
Right? Bible in schools, God being cited
now by the White House press office, the
vice president.
>> He's one of the most prominent adherence
of the Catholic sort of new right if you
will. Is there something that is
beneficial about that that is, you know,
that that can be seen as having um
positive
impacts for the Catholic Church in this
country?
>> Sure. I think when people bring their
faith sincerely into the public square
and into relationships with other
people, it's a good thing. Uh as long as
it doesn't imply that somehow God is
like on our side completely, right? And
if you're not with us, then you're
against God. That's the problem, right?
That Jesus is on our side. And if you
oppose us, you oppose Jesus. That's the
problem, right? And by the way, I often
wonder why we don't put the biatitudes
in classrooms. It's always the 10
commandments. What about blessed are the
poor? It's amazing to me that mostly
Christians want the Old Testament in the
classrooms and put on signs. But what
about blessed are the poor? Blessed are
those who mourn. Blessed are the meek.
Blessed are the peacemakers. Why is
there never a push for the biatitudes?
It's a very strange thing to me.
>> Well, why do you think that is?
>> Cuz it's hard
and it's stuff that um we want to avoid.
I mean, the ten commandments are hard,
too. But I think um these days the
biatitudes are harder. Blessed are the
meek. Blessed are the peacemakers.
We don't see too much of that.
>> I'd like to end before we speak again by
um coming back to your book. The book
finishes with you becoming a Jesuit
priest. And that seems like it brought
you a lot of meaning, a lot of peace,
and some job security. [laughter]
>> That's right.
>> You know, in your book, you take a lot
of lessons from all these different
jobs, and I'm wondering what taking
confession has taught you about human
nature and about penance and
forgiveness.
>> Wow.
>> It's just because you must hear it all
all the time. For people who aren't
Catholic, they may not know you have
this very particular role to be able to
forgive sin.
>> It's a great grace. My favorite line
about confession comes from my uh
professor Peter Frink uh in theology who
said, "Confession is not about how bad
the person is, it's about how good God
is."
>> That's my favorite.
So [music] it teaches me about God's
goodness and also just how much people
try, right? Try hard and fail and keep
going.
But it really to be able to say to
someone, you know, [music] I forgive you
is so powerful and it changes lives.
>> Thank you so much. You're welcome. My
pleasure. Really appreciate your time
and we'll talk again.
>> Thank you.
On the interview, we speak to our guest
[music] twice. So, Father Martin and I
spoke again just a few days after the
killing of Renee Good in Minneapolis,
which was obviously on [music] his mind.
>> Hi.
>> How are you?
>> I'm good.
>> Uh, I hope I was okay the other day.
>> Oh my goodness. Why would you think you
weren't?
>> I thought
>> Let me do some therapy. What's going on?
[laughter]
>> I thought I spoke too fast. Did I speak
too fast?
>> No.
>> All right. And I thought I should have
like paused and thought about my
answers. I hope they were like
intelligible and thoughtful and there
was
>> that's why we have a second call.
>> That's right. So, I'd like to redo the
whole thing.
>> Okay, let's do it.
>> You will be unsurprised uh to know that
I was also thinking about some things
from our conversation.
>> Good.
>> You know, we touched on
this political moment uh in our first
conversation and I did feel like
it might be something that you were a
little uncomfortable talking about. Do I
have that right?
>> Yeah, because I try to stay out of
politics per se. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> So, you did pick up on that correctly.
>> So, I want to maybe tackle it in a
different way. Less on the nose, but
more um just about how you think our the
church and spiritual teaching informs
this moment that we're living through.
Because one of the things that I hear a
lot, I'm not a priest obviously, but
journalists talk to a lot of people and
we hear from a lot of people and so many
people ask me, "How do I fight for what
I believe in without adding fuel to the
fire that is tearing us all apart?" I
can give you some tips. Yeah. The first
tip is always give people the benefit of
the doubt. That's the first tip. And St.
Ignatius talks about that. uh we call it
the presupposition. Always try to put a
positive spin on something that someone
else is saying or doing. Second, for me
it's never go ad homonym, right? You can
talk about something you don't like that
a person did or something some bill or
some law or some action, but really
never say this person is evil or this
person is not a Christian or all that
kind of stuff. Um and then third, I
think is being willing to put up
yourself with a lot of hate and a lot of
dislike. that's been really helpful for
me in my LGBT work. Um the freedom from
the need to be loved, liked, or approved
of. One of the things I was not
expecting was the hatred, and I mean
really hatred. You know, people there
are people online who hate me and who
protest me and I get talks canceled and
people who think I'm a fill-in- thelank
heretic, apostate, demon, Satan, false
priest. I mean, I get death threats and
that kind of stuff. It's it's pretty
horrible.
And I always go back to this retreat I
did uh probably about 10 years ago where
I was asked to pray over the gospel
passage called the rejection at
Nazareth. Okay. So Jesus gets up in the
synagogue at Nazareth, his hometown. And
he basically proclaims he's the Messiah.
Um this is in Luke's gospel I think. And
initially everybody likes him, right?
All the town's people at Nazareth, they
would have all known him. But they turn
on him
and take him to the brow of a hill where
they're trying to throw him off. They
try to kill him. basically and I
remember in prayer during the retreat um
I remember imagining myself with Jesus
and I said to Jesus in my prayer not you
know I wasn't hearing anything how are
you able to do this and the words that
came to me in prayer which I will never
forget were must everyone like you
>> and that was really a moment of
invitation for me must everyone like you
does do I really need everybody to like
me and that that's been a process for me
and that's that's a very freeing thing
if you can get there and I'm still on
the way.
>> There is I think a craving for moral
clarity at this moment
and as with any conflict
um moral clarity is being owned by
people with very different viewpoints
>> and I am sort of curious how we navigate
that. You know, it's like the idea of
when people are fighting wars in the
Middle Ages and both say that God is on
their side.
>> I mean, how do we how do we understand
who is right?
>> I've been thinking a lot about Renee
Good um and her killing. And I guess
what I come down to is this. Even if
you're breaking the law,
no one deserves to be treated like that,
right? So even if you argue that Renee
Good was somehow breaking the law, she
did not deserve to be shot in the head.
And I guess what I'm seeing is this
coarsening
of morality in the United States where
people think that's okay or she deserved
it. So when you think of people like the
inmates on death row and when you think
of migrants, when you think of
protesters, when you think of LGBTQ
people, when you think of everyone
really, right? People in Ukraine, people
in Gaza, everyone deserve to be treated
with dignity. That's what we're losing.
What's being set forth, I think, is that
only our side deserves to be treated
with dignity and the other side is
horrible and evil and subhuman. Right?
That's what's going on. Which is a
disgrace because for Jesus, there's no
us and them. There's just us.
And all of us deserve to be treated with
dignity. And I think the church has been
very clear about that. And I'm grateful
for that. And that's not a political
message. That's the gospel. Everyone has
dignity. Everyone is a beloved child of
God. Everyone deserves to be treated
with dignity and not shot in the head. I
I also saw a post from the Association
of US Catholic Priests, which is the
largest organization representing
priests in the US. And the post said in
reference also to the good killing,
among other things, that quote, "We need
to be brave enough to name evil when we
see it." And there seems to be a call to
action in that. But I just wondered what
that call to action
should be.
>> I don't know. And there's not a
one-sizefits-all answer. Here's
something that I found really
interesting. I heard this on a retreat.
When Jesus left the earth, right, at the
ascension, there were still sick people
in Galilee and Judea.
He didn't physically heal everybody. Who
did he heal? He healed the people and he
preached to the people in front of him.
And I think that's what we're called to
do. We tend to want these sort of grand
answers and it's important to think, you
know, globally, but it's really
important to do what we can one on- one.
So, I find that very freeing. Jesus
dealt with the person in front of him,
and so can we.
>> Thank you so much. This has been such a
wonderful conversation. I've really,
really enjoyed it.
>> My pleasure. Thank you.
I'm Lulu Garcia Navaro
>> and I'm David Maresy
>> and we're the hosts of the interview and
audio and video [music] podcast from the
New York Times.
>> Every week we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life.
>> Subscribe to our YouTube channel [music]
so you'll never miss an episode.